>>JAY DYER: Is there a deeper,
hidden, more esoteric meaning
behind the Hollywood films
that we all love to watch?
I'm Jay Dyer.
>>JAY WEIDNER: And
I'm Jay Weidner.
And this is "Hollywood Decoded."
[THEME MUSIC]
>>DYER: "Interstellar" is a film
from Christopher Nolan that's
about a lot of things.
It's about life, love, mistakes.
It's about other dimensions.
It's about planes of existence
beyond our four dimensions.
And I think what's fascinating
about this film is that it's
also a tribute to "2001--
A Space Odyssey."
But I think Nolan
takes a different track
than Kubrick does.
It's a more positive track.
And in this, we have AI
that actually works together
with humanity to lead
to a positive future.
What do you think?
>>WEIDNER: Well, I
think it definitely
is Nolan's tribute to "2001."
I'm sure it had a
huge influence on him.
The allegories between
this movie and "2001"
are way over the top.
The AI looks like the monolith.
The fact that they go out to
Saturn where the stargate is,
very similar to what
happens to Bowman,
only they switched it to
Jupiter because they couldn't
make Saturn look right.
But Nolan got it to look right.
Also, there's
rumors from insiders
that there is a stargate
out near Saturn.
So when I saw the movie,
I was kind of stunned
that Nolan somehow
intuitively knew
what insiders were telling me
in private, that they discovered
some kind of stargate out there.
I think you're right.
I think it's a more
optimistic view than "2001--
A Space Odyssey."
But at the same time, the
world isn't ending in "2001--
A Space Odyssey," whereas
in this film, the Earth
is literally dying.
>>DYER: Right.
But it's optimistic in the sense
that it's almost like humans
are impelled to go elsewhere.
Can we terraform other planets?
Is our destiny to actually
populate the universe
and not just stay confined
under the dominance of time?
That's another aspect
of this film is
that it's a race against time.
It's a race against gravity.
So we have time, gravity,
spatial limitations,
the same themes that Kubrick
was dealing with in "2001."
And can we transcend those
to move onto something
else, something better perhaps?
And I think he wants to give
us the possibility of that
being done through AI.
And it's a very
different approach
than an AI that wants
to nuke the planet,
like in the original
"2001" script
from Arthur C.
Clarke and Kubrick.
So I think that it's
revelatory on numerous levels,
and I think that
maybe even there's
a nod to your work, right,
with the reference to,
did we go to the moon?
And that the government
scientists actually
included this in the textbooks
for the children, which
is fascinating.
>>WEIDNER: It is
fascinating that--
I mean, in my own
personal work, of course,
I've connected the
making of "2001"
with the faking of the
Apollo moon program.
I'm not saying they
didn't go to the moon.
I'm just saying that what
they showed us was fake.
And I found it astonishing
that in a movie, which
is so clearly a tribute to
the works of Stanley Kubrick
and to "2001," that we would
have this reference to the fact
that we faked the moon landing.
Let's go watch that
clip right now.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Murph is a great kid.
She's really bright,
but she's been
having a little trouble lately.
She brought this in to show
the other students the section
on the lunar landings.
- Yeah, it's one of
my old textbooks.
She always loved the pictures.
- It's an old federal textbook.
We've replaced them with
the corrected versions.
- Corrected?
- Explaining how the
Apollo missions were faked
to bankrupt the Soviet Union.
- You don't believe
we went to the moon?
- I believe it was a
brilliant piece of propaganda,
that the Soviets bankrupted
themselves pouring resources
into rockets and other
useless machines.
- Useless machines.
- And if don't want a
repeat of the excess
and wastefulness of
the 20th century,
then we need to teach our
kids about this planet,
not tales of leaving it.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>DYER: So here we
have the presentation
of a near distant
future, wherein
Earth has kind of reverted
to an agrarian society,
and we're back to farming.
We don't need engineers.
We don't need
technology anymore.
And the idea is that
NASA is done with.
There's no more space program.
That's all been put away.
And Cooper plays
this character who
is very interested in continuing
the progress of technology,
that we don't have to revert.
We don't have to become
Luddites or anything like that.
We can do it in a positive way.
And that's why he's very
concerned for his daughter
not finding the
appropriate outlet
for her scientific gifts.
And so what they get
from the establishment,
the mainline workers out there,
is that, no, we don't need you.
You're done.
You're going to be farmers.
And I like the fact that
he is sticking to his guns.
He's rebellious.
He wants to be--
he's intent on continuing
man's progress.
But again, it's revelatory
also of the fact
that we've been lied to when
it comes to this Apollo stuff.
>>WEIDNER: Well, also
another interesting thing
is she calls the machines
they're building,
Russia is building, as useless,
as if the rockets weren't
really going anywhere.
The other thing that's
interesting about this scene
is that they're rejecting NASA
as if it really didn't exist.
It was just a big fake thing.
And then we find out
right after this scene
that there is a NASA,
that it still exists.
>>DYER: Black budget,
secret space program.
>>WEIDNER: Black budget, secret
space program, and Cooper
goes and joins that.
>>DYER: Right, right, yeah.
The background to
why this is happening
is that there's been some
kind of blight that's
affected the Earth, and we
don't know for sure what it is.
It might have been GMO.
It might have been
chemtrails, geoengineering.
We're never told.
But something's happening to
create basically a new Dust
Bowl, right?
All of the world presumably,
America, is a new Dust Bowl.
So these crops are having
a hard time growing,
and so they're suspicious.
And what we're going to find
out is that we might even
have to leave the Earth.
We might have to terraform
some other planet.
Is that even possible?
And how are we going to do that
with the problem of gravity?
But gravity is going to function
on multiple levels here.
It's not just the
physical force of gravity.
The gravity of this film
that is triumphant is love.
It's the love between
Murph and Cooper.
Murph thinks that
she's lost her father.
He's like Odysseus.
He's like Bowman.
He's gone.
Will he come back?
And it's love that
transcends space and time
to send the message in the end.
But let's get to that
here in a minute.
Let's look at this next clip.
"We're NASA."
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- We're NASA.
- NASA?
- NASA.
The same NASA you flew for.
- I heard they
shut you down, sir,
for refusing to drop
bombs in the stratosphere
on the starving people.
- Well, when they realized that
killing other people was not
a long-term solution, then
they needed us back, in secret.
- Why secret?
- Because public opinion
wouldn't allow spending
on space exploration, not
when you're struggling
to put food on the table.
Blight-- wheat, seven
years ago, okra this year.
Now there's just corn.
- And we're growing
more than we ever have.
- Well, but like the
potatoes in Ireland
and the wheat in the Dust
Bowl, the corn will die soon.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>WEIDNER: So in
the 1970s, there
was a book and a
documentary that came out
called "Alternative 3."
It was a very interesting book.
It was purported to be
real, but it was fake.
But what "Alternative
3" was saying
was that the Earth
was dying, and that we
had three alternatives to
mitigate this dying Earth.
The first alternative was to
blow a hole in the atmosphere.
No kidding, to let
the pollution out.
Alternative two was to build
deep underground military bases
and go down under there and
wait the whole thing out.
Alternative three was to leave
the planet, find other planets
and terraform them.
That's what's going on in this
movie is alternative three.
>>DYER: Right, yeah.
And it's a secret
underground base.
And what's
interesting about that
is that we had
this initial scene
at the beginning of
this drone that seemed
to have a life of its own.
And it's Murph, the
daughter, that suspects
something more is going on.
Cooper eventually
clues into this.
It leads them to NASA.
Now, why would this unmanned
drone lead them to NASA?
Well, we later figure out that
the AI of the future, which
is what saved both Cooper,
right, and Earth ultimately,
it's sending messages
back in a kind
of synchronistic, mystical way.
It's actually speaking through
this more primitive drone
version of itself.
It's the AI that is the kind of
God-figure in this film that's
leading the characters towards
the salvation of humanity.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah, it
seems to be a theme
that we seem to have
a lot in "Hollywood
Decoded" of a message
from the future trying
to help the dystopian
past or a message
from the past to try to
help the dystopian future.
In this case, the
AI from the future
is trying to solve the problems
that are happening in the past.
And in the end, it is actually--
it succeeds.
>>DYER: So this
next clip is, now
tell me what your plan
is to save the world.
And this is where we're going
to get Michael Caine's going
to save the world with his
[? overcoat ? ] of bloody
gravity.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- OK, now you need
to tell me what
your plan is to save the world.
- We're not meant
to save the world.
We're meant to leave it.
- Rangers.
- The last components of
our one versatile ship
in orbit, the Endurance,
our final expedition.
- You sent people out there
looking for a new home?
- The Lazarus missions.
- Oh, that sounds cheerful.
- Lazarus came
back from the dead.
- Sure, but he had to
die in the first place.
There's not a planet
in our solar system
that could sustain life.
And the nearest star's
over 1,000 years away,
and that doesn't even
qualify as futile.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>DYER: This is the
Lazarus mission.
So obviously we're thinking of
the Bible and the resurrection
of Lazarus, right?
Jesus raises Lazarus
from the dead.
And so the idea
here is that we've
got to perhaps send someone
into the stargate, which
is, in the film, as you
said, located near Saturn.
Saturn, we've talked about
many times, is death.
It is Cronus.
It is time.
It is the binding of us
within spatial relations.
And how are we going to
overcome that, right?
Kubrick played and toyed
with that notion in "2001."
Nolan is offering a
different answer here.
It's that we can get past that,
not just through technology.
But again, the important
aspect of this film
is that it's the love
between Murph and Cooper
that overcomes and solves
the mystery of gravity
or the binding force of gravity
that ultimately saves humanity.
So it's a race against
time and death.
>>WEIDNER: It is.
And of course, eventually
Cooper, in a way,
psychically reunites with
Murph through the tesseract--
>>DYER: Yes.
>>WEIDNER: --near the end.
And I think-- which,
I think, is one
of the most brilliant
evocations of kind
of sacred geometry
and alchemical
concepts in movie history.
And I think that
Murph rejects Cooper
because he left and
won't come back home.
And then they reunite
at the end of the film,
just like Odysseus
reunites with his wife.
And you're right.
It is about love.
It's about what
drives Cooper back.
His chief motivation
in what he's doing
is his love of Murph.
>>DYER: "A Wrinkle in
Time," a famous kid's book
that I read when I
was in grade school,
and it was my first introduction
to the idea of the tesseract.
And there's a similar theme
in "A Wrinkle in Time"
is that this
salvation has to come
through some sort of stepping
through the tesseract.
And so I wonder if
Christopher Nolan isn't even
borrowing from that
famous kid's book, which
deals with this theme.
>>WEIDNER: Nolan is
playing with time.
The big theme in
this movie is time.
And he believes that--
you can see that he's
having a hard time
dealing with time travel.
So he's not dealing
with time travel.
He's dealing with time
as a linear concept.
And Cooper has to get to
Murph, because he loves her,
but he's caught, and he gets
caught in the black hole.
And it's his love of Murph that
actually gets him back to Earth
to meet her again.
And there is no segue
in that sequence
of how he got to Earth.
He got to Earth because he
was witnessing Murph's life
through the splintering
of time in the tesseract,
and that so
overwhelmed him that he
was able to come back
to Earth on his own.
>>DYER: Exactly.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- One for you, one for me.
When I'm up there in
hypersleep or traveling
at the speed of light
or near a black hole,
time's going to change
for me, and it's
going to run more slowly.
Now, when we get back,
we're going to compare.
- Time will run
differently for us?
- Yeah.
I mean, by the time I
get back, we might even
be the same age, you and me.
What?
Imagine that.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>DYER: Tell me why you chose
that clip, because I didn't--
I mean, I thought about time
being related to this film
and obviously the
overcoming of time.
But that watch and the
sequences that he sends back
in that binary code, it
relates directly to this watch.
What do you make of that?
>>WEIDNER: Well,
I think the watch
is a little bit like the
spinning top in "Inception."
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: I think it's a device
that allows the film to go on.
It's the MacGuffin, as Hitchcock
would call it, the thing that
keeps it going.
And in the end, it's how they
communicate with each other
so that the world is saved.
Because Murph
eventually grows up.
She becomes the scientist
that saves the world
from the problems
that it has because
of her relationship with
Cooper and because Cooper
has found a way to successfully
communicate with her backwards
into time.
>>DYER: In so many
of these films,
one of the themes
that we've seen,
which goes back again to ancient
mythology and Greek mythology,
is the loss of the male,
the loss of the hero.
Darth Vader has gone
to the dark side.
and Luke doesn't have a father.
Odysseus goes off
on his journey.
Bowman goes off on his
journey into the stargate.
And so we have this
missing figure,
right, the lack of the king
in "The Lord of the Rings."
Well, return of the king, right?
That's what's
happening with Cooper.
Cooper eventually
does come back.
Because, again, it's love.
It's interconnection with
familial relationships
that I think are the real
strength of humanity.
>>WEIDNER: And the real
hero of this movie is Murph.
>>DYER: Absolutely.
>>WEIDNER: And she
doesn't have a mother.
>>DYER: Interesting.
>>WEIDNER: And she loses her
father, or her [INAUDIBLE]..
>>DYER: Right, right.
>>WEIDNER: All right?
But she becomes the
person who saves the Earth
from the disaster.
And so we don't have to
resort to alternative three,
which, by the way, it's
still happening in the movie.
They're still conquering other
worlds and sending people out,
but the Earth has been saved.
So both are happening in
the end of this movie.
The Earth has been
saved, but we're still
conquering other planets.
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: There's a certain
poem by Dylan Thomas which
permeates this film, and it's
one of my very favorite poems.
So let's watch this scene,
because the poetry really
shines through.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Do not go gentle
into that good night.
Old age should burn and
rave at close of day.
Rage, rage against the
dying of the light.
Though wise men
at their end know
dark is right, because their
words had forked no lightening
they do not go gentle
into that good night.
Rage, rage against the
dying of the light.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>WEIDNER: Ironically,
he has Michael Caine
saying the poem when it
was Michael Caine earlier
in the film who said that
we had to leave the Earth
and not rage against
the dying of the light.
And that's what is happening
is that Murph and Cooper see
that the world is
dying, and they
unite to rage against
the dying of the light.
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: And that's what
this whole movie is about.
And they stop the death of the
Earth because of their raging
against the dying of the light.
Because of their actions in this
film, they avert the disaster.
>>DYER: But again, it
requires the aid of AI, right?
So AI is not just a threat.
I think Nolan is really
trying to tell us,
as you pointed out, that
the TARS characters,
they very much resemble
the monolith in "2001."
And we know from the
original script of "2001"
that the monolith was intended
to kind of be a television
screen, video screen/AI.
It's the unknown, the
great beyond in terms
of some sort of intelligent
being, presumably
something that's a
future advanced computer.
The same idea is at work
here, but Nolan is again
saying it doesn't have
to be a negative thing.
It can be our--
it can be a positive thing.
It can help us to go to
the next level basically.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
This is one of the
few films where AI is
shown to be a positive force.
And interestingly enough,
this AI, while it's friendly,
you get the idea that it's more
like, I think, AI really is.
It's not this
conspiratorial type of thing
that keeps being presented by
Cameron and Kubrick in things.
And maybe AI is just a helpful
thing to help us think.
>>DYER: Exactly.
>>WEIDNER: And that's what's
going on in this film.
But what's really
amazing about this film
is that Nolan is
actually using cinema
as a tool to show you
hyperdimensional states.
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: And in
this next clip,
we get what a hyperdimensional
state is explained to us
in actually a pretty good way.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- There.
That's it.
That's the wormhole.
- Say it, don't spray it, Ron.
It's a sphere.
- Well, of course it is.
What, you thought it
would just be a hole?
- No, it's just that
all the illustrations
that I've ever seen, they--
- Illustrations?
Let me show you how it works.
So they say you want to
go from here to there,
but it's too far.
- Mm-hmm.
- So a wormhole
bends space like this
so you can take a shortcut
through a higher dimension.
OK, so to show that, they've
turned three-dimensional space
into two dimensions,
which turns a wormhole
into two dimensions, a circle.
And what's a circle
in three dimensions?
- A sphere.
- Exactly.
A spherical hole.
But who put it there?
Who do we have to thank?
[END PLAYBACK ]
>>DYER: Edwin Abbott
wrote a famous novel
during the Victorian
Era called "Flatland."
And in that novel, what he does
is he tries to explain the next
dimension [? up ?] where
[? he ?] tesseract through
the idea of circle and
triangle man interacting
in a two-dimensional
world, right,
and what would it be like to try
to describe the third dimension
to the two-dimensional world.
Well, here we have
another layer up.
And there's some great videos
even by Carl Sagan on YouTube
where he explains the
idea of a tesseract.
And although we don't
know what that's like,
it's an actual real
geometrical form.
Now, this is really
fascinating, and some
of the top physicists
like Lisa Randall
have actually written
books on this.
And what she does
is she explains
the mathematics of the
next dimension [? up, ?]
believe it or not,
through crystals.
There are many
crystals that actually
have the geometrical pattern
and structure of what we believe
the next dimension to be.
So I'm not making this up.
There are quasicrystals, right?
This is what's sprayed
on nonstick pans.
Lisa Randall has a
famous essay on this
where she talks about the fact
that the reason that nonstick
pans work, the reason
that they're slippery,
is because they have this
geometrical structure
in their crystal.
And that is the same geometrical
structure of whatever
the next dimension is.
And that's how it's
pictured in the film.
Nolan tries to picture
it in that weird sort
of infinite library
scene, right?
But that's actually what we
believe the next dimension is.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
And what's so great
about that scene
is that Nolan is
dividing time into space.
So every time that--
every time that Cooper
looks through one
of the windows in
the tesseract, he's
seeing another moment in
Murph's life in her bedroom.
One of the subplots
of the movie is
that Murph is being haunted
by a ghost in her bedroom.
So let's cut to this
scene and show you
that, and then we'll talk
about what this really means.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- I told you about my ghost.
My dad thought I called it a
ghost because I'm scared of it.
But I was never scared of it.
I called it a ghost
because it felt--
it felt like a person that was
trying to tell me something.
If there's an answer
here on Earth,
it's back there
somehow in that room.
So I have to find it.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>DYER: What I find
interesting about this
is another aspect
to which Nolan is
challenging our traditional
conceptions of aliens
and ghosts.
So if you remember earlier in
the film, we didn't look at it,
but there's a scene where Cooper
and the Anne Hathaway character
are--
right before they're
going to the stargate
they see this kind
of hand reach out
of some higher
dimension towards them.
Later in the film, we're dealing
with this issue of the ghost
that Murph perceived to
be in her room all along.
So here we have the idea of
the aliens and the ghosts.
And what Nolan is presenting
is this interesting idea
of maybe all of that
paranormal phenomenon
and so forth could
actually just be
advanced humans in the
future stepping back in time.
I don't know what
I think about that,
but it's an interesting thesis.
I've never seen anybody
come up with that idea.
>>WEIDNER: Actually, I have
heard that idea, that UFOs
and aliens and
things are actually
humans from the future
coming back doing something.
I don't know what.
But it is a very
interesting idea.
And so in this scene,
we see that she--
this is Murph later, older.
And she's having
flashbacks to her childhood
as they're leaving the
house for the last time
because the Earth is dying.
And she wants to go
back in one last time
to see this bedroom
where she had
the interaction with the ghost.
And of course, that becomes
the climax of the movie
as she begins to realize that
the ghost is not a ghost.
It's actually Cooper who is
in another dimension trying
to communicate to her, and
we have the delicious scene
with the watch.
>>DYER: Yeah.
There's another important
philosophical aspect
to the film that
I want to mention,
and that's the reference to the
works of Douglas Hofstadter.
He's written two famous
books, one of which
was a Pulitzer Prize-winning
book called "Godel, Escher,
and Bach," and
there he's dealing
with the famous
logician Kurt Godel.
And Godel had this famous
theory refuting Bertrand Russell
that the way that we would prove
mathematical entities as real
is to show that as long as you
believe in one sequence or set
of numbers, they're always
going to be self-referencing.
And he's saying
that you can never
get outside of that set without
appealing to that set, which
proves that there's some other
layer or level of reality,
which Hofstadter
titles strange loops.
And so what
Hofstadter does is he
looks at the musical
compositions of Bach.
He looks at the
artwork of MC Escher.
And he says that
you can see patterns
that show the limitations
of our dimension.
It's a very famous book.
This is not
speculation or weird.
This is a very
prominent guy who's
saying that there are
higher dimensions,
and we can know
this mathematically.
And there are other
mathematicians
that have shown this.
The implications are tremendous.
And the reason I mention
that is because there's
a brief scene inside
Murph's lecture
hall or her room,
office, or whatever,
where you actually see the works
of Douglas Hofstadter sitting
on the shelf.
>>WEIDNER: And in "Inception,"
they do the MC Escher stairs.
>>DYER: Exactly.
>>WEIDNER: They have the
chase scene on the stairs.
So Nolan is clearly
aware of all this stuff
and is referencing
it left and right.
>>DYER: And what is the
bridge is; we are the bridge.
Our psyche, our
love, it's humanity.
And our minds that
are the bridge,
it's not something out there.
It requires the psyche.
And that's why when he
goes in to the stargate
and into the tesseract, it's all
a manifestation of his psyche.
That's how he talks
to his daughter.
>>WEIDNER: And don't
forget, love is attraction.
>>DYER: Yes.
>>WEIDNER: And love is gravity.
When two people are
in love, whether it's
a daughter and father or a
man and woman or whoever,
they're feeling--
you can literally feel the
gravity between the two
increasing.
He's drawing the analogy
that gravity and love
are very closely related.
>>DYER: Yeah.
When he goes into the stargate
or into the tesseract,
it's his psyche.
And this is just what we
saw in "Inception," right?
The Nolan film "Inception"
has the exact same theme.
It's all dealing with the inner
world of Cobb's subconscious
and his projections, right?
This is the exterior
world going out
there to the farthest reaches.
And what happens is, when
he goes to the tesseract,
it's back inside.
>>WEIDNER: That's exactly right.
That's exactly the difference
between the two movies.
One is inside trying to get out.
The other is out
trying to get in.
>>DYER: And we're going to
see that with this clip,
that all of this is one little
girl's bedroom and one moment.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- It's not a ghost.
It's gravity.
- But you're going to get TARS.
I brought myself here.
We're here to communicate with
the three-dimensional world.
We're the bridge.
I thought they chose me.
They didn't choose me.
They chose her.
- For what, Cooper?
- To save the world.
All of this is one
little girl's bedroom.
Every moment is
infinitely complex.
They have access to
infinite time and space,
but they're not
bound by anything.
If they can find a
specific place in time,
they can communicate.
That's why I'm here.
I'm going to find a
way to tell Murph,
just like I found this moment.
- How, Cooper?
- Love, TARS, love.
This is [INAUDIBLE] go inside.
My connection with Murph,
it is quantifiable.
It's the key.
- What are we here to do?
- Find how to tell her.
The watch.
That's it.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>DYER: So what
he finds out here
is that the future
advanced humans do
have the ability to
transcend time and space,
but they need a medium
still to communicate.
So what Cooper has to do is
to find that medium, which
is a specific moment in time
to which he can translate
through this binary
code, but it's not
going to work unless
there's love there.
And what's amazing about that
is that initially in the film
gravity is the enemy
that has to be overcome.
Gravity's going
to kill humanity.
Here gravity is
transformed into the force
of love, which, believe or
not, that echoes Aristotle.
Aristotle said that there
is some universal force.
It causes all the planets
and the celestial spheres
to spin and go around.
And what is that force?
Love.
>>WEIDNER: That's exactly
what this movie is saying.
And that's how Murph
transcends being
caught in the black
hole, which surely
would have ripped him apart.
And the one thing I like about
this tesseract scene the most
is that Nolan eschews using CGI.
He's literally building the set,
probably on a huge soundstage
somewhere, and using a real
camera to glide in [INAUDIBLE]..
>>DYER: And a real tesseract
that they [INAUDIBLE]
>>WEIDNER: And a real tesseract.
It is a real tesseract.
And he does this
throughout the film.
He uses physical effects,
and he gives the film
this kind of rough quality that
CGI films really don't have.
>>DYER: That's a good point.
>>WEIDNER: And I'm
with Nolan on that.
>>DYER: Yeah.
The god of this movie is
a future advanced humanity
united with AI.
And it's the same idea
that we see in "2001,"
again with a positive spin
instead of the negative spin.
And it's fascinating that we
have the crossing of the abyss.
This is something that comes
out of the esoteric hermetic
traditions, the idea that--
what we've seen in "Lord
of the Rings," right?
Remember, Gandalf had to cross
the abyss, defeat the Balrog,
and then he moves on to a
higher state of existence.
The same thing happens
to Cooper, right?
Cooper has to-- he's the
lone man, the bow man
shot out, as you pointed out,
to overcome the abyss of death.
And it's ultimately,
again, love that does that.
And what's the
point of this movie?
Well, it's just to
use technology wisely
and that we can't divorce
it from the ultimate aspect
of humanity, which is love.
>>WEIDNER: Another
thing to be pointed out
is that tree of
life in the Kabbalah
is a little bit like a tesseract
in the way it's constructed.
And there is an abyss
in the tree of life.
It's called Da'at.
When you're moving
from Tif'eret to Keter,
you have to cross the abyss.
Keter is the ultimate
way where you commune
with the mind of the Creator.
But you can't commune with
the mind of the Creator
until you've gone
through this abyss.
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: Kubrick's
telling us this.
"Lord of the Rings"
is telling us this.
And Nolan's telling us this.
>>DYER: So what I
like about this film
is that, again, we're given a
positive appraisal about what
we can do with technology.
It doesn't have to be negative.
We don't have to be
dissuaded from implementing
a space program or any
of this kind of stuff.
Because as long as
we do it wisely,
it can lead us into
terraforming other worlds.
And again, the chief
message of the film
is that if we can maintain
interpersonal relations
without losing them at the
expense of gaining tech
dominance, then
we're going to go--
we're going to go to the stars.
>>WEIDNER: My takeaway is
that the love between Cooper
and Murph actually end
up saving the world.
So love conquers all.
>>DYER: So again, I think we
have to look back to Aristotle.
Because although there's
a lot of good in Plato,
there's also good
correctives that
come from Aristotle that
rebuke some of the errors,
I believe, in Plato.
And one of the things
that Aristotle said
was that there is some
sort of unifying force
that's out there.
He believed that it was a
god and that it was some kind
of mind, a universal mind.
But he didn't just say
it was a universal mind.
Aristotle literally
said it was love.
He said that love is
the ultimate force,
the ultimate unity and
attraction that doesn't just
move the planets.
It also moves human virtue,
human emotion, and human will.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
And love's that one thing that
really you can't quantify.
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: You can't explain
why you love your child
or why you love your
wife or whatever.
You can't explain it.
You can't explain why you love.
You don't know why.
So it's a completely
mysterious force.
And again, I believe that
there is this ether around us.
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: And I believe
that love is a gravity.
It is a very serious gravity.
And when you're in a
loving relationship,
that gravity is very comforting.
>>DYER: I think it's a real
experience of the divine.
Join us again next time
on "Hollywood Decoded."
I'm Jay Dyer.
>>WEIDNER: And I'm Jay Weidner.
And thanks for watching.
[THEME MUSIC]